= http_parser

This gem provides a (hopefully) high quality http parser library that can
build request information iteratively as data comes over the line without
requiring the caller to maintain the entire body of the request as a single
string in memory.

It will also have a full set of specs and a Ruby-native reference library
so that it can be used in implementations or environments that do not
support C extensions.

Simple usage example:

	p = Http::Parser.new
	p.parse("GET / HTTP/1.1\r\n")
	p.parse("Host: blah.com\r\n")
	p.parse("Cookie: blorp=blah\r\n")
	p.parse("\r\n")
	
	p.method => "GET"
	p.version => [1,1]
	p.path => "/"
	p.headers["HOST"] => "blah.com"
	p.headers["COOKIE"] => "blorp=blah"
	
If the request is a type that has a body, the body will be available
as a stream object via p.body:

	p = Http::Parser.new
	p.parse("PUT / HTTP/1.1\r\n")
	p.parse("Host: blah.com\r\n")
	p.parse("Content-Type: text/text\r\n")
	p.parse("Content-Length: 5\r\n")
	p.parse("\r\n")
	p.parse("stuff")
	
	p.body.read => "stuff"
	
If you use p.parse!, any trailing text that isn't immediately parseable
will be left in the string object you pass in while what was parsed will be
removed. This allows for you to hand the parser a large glob of data and allow
it to figure out what it needs and what it doesn't. When you get more data, you
can append it to your existing string and pass that in again until the request
is done. You can test if the request is done by using p.done?

	p = Http::Parser.new
	s = "GET / HTTP/1.1\r\nHost:"
	p.parse!(s)
	s => "Host:"
	p.done? => false
	s << " blah.com\r\n"
	p.parse!(s)
	s => ""
	p.done? => false
	s << "\r\n"
	p.parse!(s)
	s => ""
	p.done? => true
	
== Note on Patches/Pull Requests
 
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Graham Batty. See LICENSE for details.
